You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor Dr. Bob McCartney.
Hey, good morning.
So glad that you're here this morning.
Welcome, 11 o'clock east.
We're really glad that you're here as well as Shepherd Campus.
and our West Campus, and those of you who watch us on television or online.
Let's open our Bibles to Ecclesiastes chapter 1.
It is not a sin to use the table of contents if you need to find Ecclesiastes.
It's really okay.
Just don't thumb through thinking you're going to stumble across it, okay?
It's more efficient to use the table of contents if you use an analog Bible like me.
If you use your phone or an iPad or an app,
then you should be able to find it pretty easily.
But we're gonna start a series of messages this morning.
I'm not gonna preach every verse in Ecclesiastes.
You would find that it would be way too depressing if I did that.
Just to be really honest with you, this book has some challenges as we work our way through it.
But I'm gonna do eight messages through the book of Ecclesiastes.
And there is a reason that I am doing this because I think that this book may speak as directly to our cultural moment
than any other book in the Bible.
This book is really an incredible, insightful book that I think we need to hear this message.
A few years ago, Jim Carrey, who won awards for his acting in the Truman Show, and of course he's a comedian, and I think his most enduring legacy
will be that every year we watch the Grinch who stole Christmas and Jim Carrey did that better than maybe anybody else has ever done it.
I mean, it was a great performance, but he was being interviewed and he's at the, I mean, he's on the top of the world.
He's got all the money he could ever need.
He's got a job.
He's fulfilled in acting.
He's won all these awards.
He's a top level comedian.
And he was being interviewed and he said this, I think everybody should get rich and famous and do everything they ever dreamed of so they can see that it's not the answer.
This is not a man who was failing.
This is not a man who was frustrated.
This is not a man who somehow is not living a life that he wanted.
This is a man who,
is succeeding and he's finding that it leaves him empty.
There's got to be something more.
There is a myth that says achievement will solve my problems.
That success will somehow soothe the ache in my soul.
That if I get to the next level, whatever the next level is,
then I'm going to be fulfilled and I'm going to be satisfied.
And I'm going to believe that my life is significant.
I'm going to find significance and satisfaction.
And the truth is that it only leaves us longing for more.
As Americans, we are the most prosperous people on planet earth.
Whoever lived on planet earth, by the way,
Oh yes, there's a few pockets of people who are very wealthy kings and dictators.
But as a populace, we are the most prosperous people who've ever lived.
We have more conveniences than any generation that has ever lived.
And we have something that previous generations could not imagine.
And that is free time.
to pursue pleasure and hobbies and travel, and yet there is something that is missing.
That is the diagnosis of who we are as Americans right now.
And what we have discovered is that though we have the whole world at our fingertips, the world is not enough.
It is not enough to satisfy our souls.
It is not enough to give significance to our lives.
And so we're going to turn
to the book of Ecclesiastes.
Now the Bible tells us in the first verse of this book that it is written by the teacher.
That's what he calls himself.
And he says that he is the son of David and king in Jerusalem.
Now that narrows it down for us.
Some people want to debate who wrote it.
I don't spend my time debating stuff that the Bible just tells me.
If he's the son of David and he's king in Jerusalem, that would be Solomon.
Solomon wrote the book of Ecclesiastes.
As a matter of fact, as background, just so we kind of understand a little bit about the book, Solomon wrote three books in the Old Testament.
He wrote Song of Songs.
He wrote or at least compiled the book of Proverbs and he wrote Ecclesiastes.
I believe along with some very credible Old Testament scholars that Song of Songs was written in his youth.
Maybe in his 20s, Song of Songs was written when he was head over heels in love.
It is a book of romance and affection.
That's the kind of book that it is.
And it's a great book for learning about relationships.
He wrote Proverbs, I believe, in his middle age.
Maybe when he was a parent and had teenagers, he repeatedly, you know, hear me out, he repeatedly
addresses someone in that book as my son.
My son, find wisdom.
My son pursue this.
I believe that he wrote proverbs as advice from a father to his sons.
A good father passes on advice about what they've learned about life to their children.
And Proverbs is a book that says, here's how you live a life that honors God.
Here's how you live a life of integrity.
Here's how you live a life to succeed in this world.
It's actually a very practical and good, good book to read.
But I believe he wrote Ecclesiastes later in life.
He wrote Ecclesiastes maybe as an empty nester when those sons that he'd advised are now kind of out of the house in some ways.
He wrote Ecclesiastes after he had pursued every avenue possible in order to find success and significance.
And what he finds is really startling.
You see, Solomon had the means to do so.
Solomon was among the wisest people that ever lived.
When Solomon first became king, God came to Solomon in the night and he woke him up and he said, Solomon,
ask whatever you want from me and I'll grant it to you.
And wouldn't it be cool if God stood at the foot of your bed and woke you up one night and said, just ask me whatever you want.
And Solomon said, what I request is wisdom.
And so Solomon was granted the gift of great wisdom.
And God said to him, since you have asked me for wisdom,
I'm also going to give you wealth.
Since you've asked me for something noble, I'll give you something else.
I'll give you wealth.
The queen of Sheba, an African nation, came to visit Solomon to hear his wisdom.
And she said of his wealth that the half could not be told.
He was the richest man who had ever lived.
He had wisdom.
He had wealth.
And I must tell you, he had women.
700 wives.
300 side chicks.
That's what the Bible says.
Y'all read it.
You just got to read creatively, but that's what is concubines, okay?
Now I am a man who believes in the veracity and the truthfulness of the Word of God.
But if anything has ever caused me the slightest bit of doubt about that, it would be saying that Solomon had 700 wives and he was the wisest man that ever lived.
Two things can be true, okay?
But Solomon late in his life writes this book and he writes this book to help us understand something.
When you read this book, I'm just gonna be, I'm gonna warn you before we plow through it.
There are parts of it that are unsettling to us spiritually.
There are things that Solomon is going to say that you look at it and you go, man, it looks like he's lost his faith.
Solomon is not faithless.
This is not an atheistic perspective.
He has not turned his back on God.
What Solomon is doing for us in this book is he's not saying, I am faithless.
I've lost my faith.
He is exposing misplaced faith.
He's saying, when you trust in the wrong things, life will not work.
Now, all of that is background and I want us to work into the text.
The Bible's the most important part of this, but you need to know some of that as we work forward.
So look at chapter one, verse one.
The words of the teacher, son of David, king in Jerusalem,
Here's the thesis sentence of the book.
Absolute futility says the teacher.
Absolute futility.
Everything is futile.
What does a person gain for all his efforts that he labors at under the sun?
Wow, what an opening.
Absolute futility.
Here's what Solomon's going to say to us first of all.
Life is pointless when we leave God out.
Solomon really wants to communicate something to you because he's had the wealth and he's had the opportunity.
He's had the free time to pursue everything in life.
And he says everything is futile.
And he doesn't add this, but I will, apart from God.
You see, throughout the course of this book, Solomon is going to apply his research to work, to wealth, to pleasure, to relationships, to his use of time.
And when he comes out on the other side, what he's going to tell us is that it is all futility if you live your life apart from God.
There is something that is missing.
The Hebrew word is the word, evil.
Not evil, evil.
And it has a,
sort of different shades of meaning.
Some translations say the NIV says meaningless, meaningless.
Everything is meaningless.
Now, I don't particularly like that translation because I'll say that work has some meaning.
I mean, God tells us to go to work, provide for our families.
So work has some meaning.
It's not totally meaningless, but it's not ultimately meaningful.
It's not eternally meaningful sometimes.
Relationships certainly have meaning, but if you think they're going to satisfy your soul, you're looking for your soulmate to satisfy your soul, you're going to come up short because only God can fill that God-sized vacuum inside us.
The word in the New Testament is sometimes translated in a different way.
It's the Greek word that would be the parallel to this is sometimes
Translated vapor or transient or something in James chapter 4 verse 4 James writes you don't know what your life will be like tomorrow What your life will be for you are like a vapor that appears for a little while and then it vanishes you are a vapor when you walked outside of your house and
this morning out of the warmth of your living room and out of the warmth of your kitchen.
And you stepped outside this morning.
You literally could see your breath.
You could see that vapor.
It was there one moment and it was gone the next.
Solomon says, that's what life's like.
It's real.
It's there, but it's transient and it won't bear any weight.
It doesn't have any real, eternal significance.
And that's what he says about every area of life.
Our life is like a breath.
It's transient.
It's something that's passing away.
A few years ago, Tom Brady had already won three Super Bowls, had three Super Bowl rings with the New England Patriots.
He had a supermodel wife.
I mean, everything about his life was just, he's on top of the mountain.
As a matter of fact, an interviewer for the CBS show 60 Minutes said, Tom, you are on top of the mountain.
What is life like?
And Tom responded, why do I have three Super Bowl rings and still think there's something greater out there for me?
I mean, maybe a lot of people say, Hey man, this is what it is.
I've reached my goal, my dream, my life.
But me, I think God, it's got to be more than this.
And then Tom Brady to that reporter said the line that stuck with me,
He said, quote, I think there's probably a lot of people that would say, hey, this is what it is.
And I've done it.
And I'm like, this can't be all it's cracked up to be.
This is not a man who had failed.
This is a man who had succeeded brilliantly.
I mean, he's got the perfect life it would seem to a lot of us.
And Tom Brady is saying, but there's still something missing.
Life is pointless when we try to live it without God.
Yes, Tom was on top of a mountain, but he found out it was a mountain of evil.
It was a mountain of futility.
It was a mountain of things that were passing away.
Why is it that success does not satisfy?
I mean, why is that the case?
Well, let me help you to understand it.
See, God created a world that was perfect where there would be absolute fulfillment in our work and in our relationships and everything would be perfect.
And then the people that he put in it chose to go their own way, do their own thing and rebel against him.
They violated his commandment.
Sin enters the picture.
And when sin entered the picture, it didn't just affect the people.
We tend to think sin just affected the people.
No, it affected the entire created order.
It affected everything about the world.
Nothing works like God fully intended it to work.
Nothing.
That's why Romans 8.20 says, for the creation was subjected to, look at this word, futility.
Yes, the world spins.
Yes, the systems go on, but they do not produce ultimate meaning.
They cannot satisfy your soul.
They cannot give you a sense of significance in your life.
Life is pointless when we leave God out.
Second, life is repetitious when we leave God out.
Look at verse three.
What does a person gain for all his efforts that he labors at under the sun?
A generation goes, and a generation comes, but the earth remains forever.
The sun rises, and the sun sets, panting.
It hurries back to the place where it rises, gusting to the north, turning to the south, turning, turning, goes the wind, and the wind returns to its cycles.
All the streams flow to the sea.
Yet the sea is never full to the place where the streams flow, and there they flow again.
All things are weary some more than anyone can say.
The eye is not satisfied by seeing or the ear filled with hearing.
What has been is what will be.
And what has been done is what will be done.
There is nothing new for the Son.
Now if you came this morning and you wanted like a pep talk, you're not getting it.
But you're getting a reality talk.
because Solomon is saying to us, life is repetitious when we leave God out.
Now there are two phrases in this book that you've got to grab on to to understand.
One is that word, evil futility.
He's going to use that word 38 times in this short book, 38 times.
But the other phrase that is so important to understand the book of Ecclesiastes is used twice in this passage.
It bookends this passage.
In verse three, he says,
What is the person game for all his labors that he labors at look at that phrase under the Sun?
At the down at the end of verse 9 he says there is nothing new under the Sun Here's what you must understand to grab on to Ecclesiastes and to understand that it's not a book of faithlessness or hopelessness What he's saying is this is my earthbound perspective
This is life under the sun.
This is not life from an eternal perspective.
This is life looked at from strictly living on this earth, trying to find meaning in what I do, trying to find meaning in the few years that I have on this planet.
Now, sometimes the Bible gives us a beyond the sun perspective, especially in the New Testament.
There are truths in the New Testament that we don't necessarily feel like we're experiencing at this moment, but they're true because it's God's perspective.
Let me give you an example.
In the book of Romans, Romans chapter eight, there's this passage, there's this verse, and it says, we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
Now I want to tell you something, I wake up some mornings and I don't feel like I am more than a conqueror.
My back hurts.
I can't hardly get out of the bed.
I mean, I am not more than a conqueror in that moment, okay?
But from God's perspective, because what Christ has done for me, I am more than a conqueror.
That's an above the sun or beyond the sun perspective.
That's the perspective of God on my life.
Solomon says, no, that's not what I'm looking at.
What I've tried is I wanted to see if there's really meaning, if there's significance, if my life matters under the sun, if I lived it without God.
And here's what he says.
I found that life is just repetitious.
In verse four, a generation goes and a generation comes and the earth just keeps spinning.
The earth goes on forever.
Some of us like to think that the world is going to end without us.
I mean, yeah, we know that someday we're going to die.
And when we die, man, the world's just going to stop turning.
No, it's not.
It's just not.
By the way, it's interesting to me that Solomon starts with the negative.
A generation goes and a generation comes.
We would say that normally a generation comes and a generation goes.
That's not where he starts.
He starts with the departure, with the death.
Someday we're all gonna die.
They're gonna dig a hole, they're gonna put us in a box and put us in the hole in the ground.
They're gonna put some dirt on top of it.
And we think, man, there's no way that the world's gonna keep turning.
There's no way that Bob leaves us, that the church is gonna keep going.
Let me tell you something.
30 minutes after I die, some of y'all gonna be sitting in the fellowship hall eating potato salad, talking about who's gonna win the national championship the next night.
That's how important I am, okay?
The world keeps turning.
We are not the center of creation.
Not only that, but he says the sun, it rises and it sets and panting.
It hurries back to the place where it rises.
He's not making a scientific statement here, but he's just saying,
that life is monotonous, life is repetitious.
Sun comes up, sun goes down.
It rises in the east, it travels over to the west, and then he says, panting.
Like a runner on a track, without a finish line, the sun just keeps in its cycle.
Constantly, constantly.
He says the same thing about the wind.
The wind blows out of the north, the wind blows out of the south, then it returns to its cycle.
Look, it's January.
The wind's gonna blow out of the north, right?
But March and April are coming, and it's going to shift out of that Mexican desert, and it's going to blow hot air up here.
I mean, it's going to happen.
It is the cycle of life.
It just constantly continues.
All the streams flow into the sea, but the sea's never full.
Now, that probably vexed Solomon.
He's like, well, how does that work?
And now we know there's a water cycle.
Evaporation, condensation, precipitation.
Remember that from eighth grade science class, whatever it was?
It's a constant cycle.
It constantly moves.
And that's what he's saying to us in this passage.
He says the eye is never satisfied by seeing.
The more you see, the more you want to see.
Look, this is ancient wisdom, but some of us, we have these devices and we scroll and we scroll and we scroll.
The eye is not satisfied by seeing.
It's just not.
We're on that out.
We're going to take five minutes just glance at it.
Hour later, we're scrolling, scroll of doom.
I mean, it's constant.
By the way, by the way, the eye is not satisfied by seeing.
This is how pornography gets its hooks into people.
The eye is not satisfied by seeing.
As a matter of fact, it craves more and it craves more and it craves more and it is never satisfied.
And that's why some people go back to that over and over and over to that empty well, to that dry well.
They just keep thinking that if I go this time, it's gonna fulfill me.
If I go this time, it's gonna satisfy me.
And the I is never satisfied, ever.
And then he comes to this moment and he takes all of those things into consideration.
And in verse 80 says, all things are wearisome more than anyone can say.
This world just wears me out.
This repetitious cycle leads me to fatigue.
In January of 2023, Jacinda Arden was the Prime Minister of New Zealand.
She had won the election in 2018.
She had led New Zealand through the whole COVID thing and her policies and the policies of her government were some of the strictest on earth, but she remained very, very popular.
She had not lost an election.
She had not lost the
the support of her party, she could have led for a long time.
She stood up one day and out of the blue, she just resigned.
She quit.
And when asked why, she said this, I no longer have enough in the tank.
Anybody else in this room ever felt that way?
I just don't have enough in the tank.
This life is fatiguing.
The monotony, without God, life is so repetitious.
And you can hear the discontent in Solomon's voice when he writes this, everything is wearying.
Now remember this is a guy who's got anything he wants at his fingertips, anything.
And he says, everything has just worn me out.
Discontent though is not rebellion.
When you feel that in your soul, in those baptism testimonies, every time we do baptism testimonies, there's a phrase that pops up.
I was just going through the motions."
That's how some of us feel.
It's constant motion, but it's motion without meaning.
And discontent is not rebellion.
Sometimes it is meant for us to long for something else, something more.
And that's where Solomon finally comes to, he says, life is disappointing when we leave God out.
In verse nine, there is nothing new under the sun.
Now some of you have heard me read that verse.
You're like, yeah, there is.
I mean, I got a new iPhone.
I got new stuff.
But here's what Solomon's trying to say.
Novelty will not satisfy and novelty will not save.
Every generation of people on this planet has believed
that the hope is in the future.
The next thing is going to somehow solve all our problems and satisfies the next thing.
When they invented the wheel, they thought, man, that's gonna solve all our problems.
We don't have to carry dirt and buckets anymore.
We can carry in a wagon.
It didn't solve all our problems.
When the transmission of electricity
became possible to go into homes and to bring lights and convenience.
Man, that's going to change the world.
And there were some changes, but it didn't revolutionize life.
In the 1990s, the internet was supposed to make everything better, not so much.
Now, listen to people talking.
It's AI.
Oh, AI is gonna be the, AI is gonna change everything.
We're all gonna have great lives and everything's gonna be satisfying and pleasure because of AI.
I watch Terminator.
I'll tell you that.
I'm not convinced, okay?
A little scared.
But I'm gonna tell you how I know that the future will not solve your problems because I watched the Jetsons when I was growing up.
Remember George Jetson?
His boy Elroy.
Daughter Judy.
Jane, his wife.
Ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.
George has a robot made in a flying car.
He pushes a button and some little arm comes down and brushes his teeth and combs his hair.
He pushes another button and it dresses him.
George has every modern convenience, but on every one of those shows he has conflict with his boss, he has parenting problems with Elroy, his teenage daughters giving him fits, he has conflict with his wife.
The real stuff of life didn't change in the space age.
Now I know that's just a cartoon.
But I also found one little interesting thing when I was researching this.
Did you know?
that Hannah Barbera was the production company that made the Jetsons.
They also made the Flintstones.
And they used the same storylines for the Flintstones and the Jetsons.
They just changed the scripts to meet the characters.
Same family conflict, all that sort of stuff.
So whether it's the Stone Age or the Space Age, human hearts have not changed.
Technology changes environments, not human hearts.
That's an under the sun perspective.
So where is the hope in all this?
Well, Solomon doesn't give us much right here, but I'm going to, because I can't stand this.
Into a world of evil, of futility, steps Jesus.
And here's what he says.
I have come that you might have life
and have it abundantly.
The monotonous repetition can be replaced with a life of meaning.
Movement without meaning can be replaced with mission.
The futility and emptiness of life can be changed to a life that matters for all eternity when it is lived for Christ.
because it's not just you living your life for Him, it's you giving your life to Him and living His life through you.
That is where meaning and fulfillment and joy come from.
And for the next eight weeks, we're gonna dig in on some of these avenues, these dead ends that Solomon went down.
And we're gonna, because some of us are still trying to go down the same streets.
And we're gonna find that Jesus
is the answer.
It really doesn't matter what the question is.